Style, manner, physically. As someone who wanted
to get from point A to point B in the shortest time
and got there. He did not tolerate foolishness.
Spoke with great conviction.
And I suspect that at times he was less certain than
he appeared to be. But again, I think one of the
things that was very good about Earl Rudder was
that even though he was not an academician, he knew
what a good university was about. And I think that
he diligently saw people who could move A&M from
where it was to where it needed to be. At that time,
we just had a lot of strong administrators. Talk
about Frank Hubert. Fred Benson was very strong.
Again, time sort of faded, but agriculture was
always strong with John Hutchison. So just across
the board A&M was staffed by very strong
administrators. Do you know of any individual or
individuals that were part of the A&M campus that
were particularly
influential with Mr. Ruddell? I think Fred
Benson. I had an opportunity to sit on the
Executive Committee for a while, and Fred Benson
was the one who was most likely to openly differ
with Earl Ruddell. And Earl Rutter always seemed
to respect Fred Benson's opinion and his
guidance.
So I think he was the one who impressed me most of the
time that I saw him, as far as being able to speak
very directly with Earl Rutter. Q Can you think of
any important issues or decisions during Mr.
Rutter's era that in second thought if we had it to
do over again, we would have done it differently?
Can you think of any decision that? Well, the one
that I think that I would like to have seen done
differently. I may be the lone ranger. But with
ANM's
widespread system office that we have now in the
university, I thought one of the mistakes that was
probably made at the time was the giving up of UT
Arlington. What's now UT Arlington was Arlington
State College. It was an engineering-oriented
university in the Metroplex. And I've been told
that there may have been a lot of pressure from UT to
get that. My feeling at the time was that the
faculty up there did not believe that A&M paid as
much attention to UT Arlington as it deserved and
that may or may not have been the case. But I think
A&M lost a real opportunity to have a major
presence in the metroplex. And that could be so
significant today for many, many reasons. I think
so. Again, there were others that were obviously
value judgments, one that's much less important
on the large scale. But I thought the junction was
something that was very unusual, if not unique,
that A&M had to offer. And again, it appeared to me
that junction was given up to Texas Tech with
little reluctance and no resistance.
One of the things that, again, I thought was
interesting, and I think there were some obvious
reasons why, but at least my understanding was
that when they got UT Galveston, they had an
opportunity to have a presence of Corpus Christi
at the same time. And I think that was a very
important decision. What will prove to be best may
still be in the future. Were you aware that Mr.
Rutter's health was declining before he became
ill? I was aware that he had gained a lot of weight.
It didn't appear his color was as good as it might
be, but that was a very demanding job, physically,
emotionally.
I suspected then and found out later as I was moving
into so-called upper level administration that
you get invited to a lot of meals. For a lot of us it's
hard to pass up that dessert, and we probably
should, but I know that there were a lot of people
who really believed that having a combined
present university and present system in one
person was more than should be expected of any one
human being. Because it was very, very
pressure-packed and very demanding. But don't I
recall that he, sometimes as president, was not in
agreement with the system leadership and that he
liked getting it all under his... Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely. And this is not quite a sequence, but I
remember, again, going back to the cell study and
my visiting with Jack Williams. One of the first
questions I asked him, because of the strong
feeling people had about a combined job for one
person being a killer, I asked Jack Williams what
his thoughts were. about having two separate
offices. And he was adamant that it should be one.
And I remember him telling me that there was only
one thing that he knew of that worked, and that is in
the Navy, that if you had an admiral of fleet aboard
a ship, there was never any question that the
captain of the ship ran the ship. Admiral had
nothing to do with the operation of the ship. He
said anytime you have the system offices on the
campus of the flagship university, you've got
problems because you've got end runs that are
being constantly made. And in essence, he
wouldn't tolerate the idea of having the jobs
separated. So there were obvious reasons as to why
the CEO wanted to have control of the the system as
well as the university because there is so much
interaction between and among the agencies that
it certainly makes the line of authority much
clearer. So do you remember any moment when you
heard that Mr. Rutter was seriously ill or had
died? I remember it because I thought it was a
catastrophic time for A&M. I don't remember the
specific moments. When John Kennedy was shot, I
remember walking out on the third floor of a
G-Roller flight and hearing what I thought was a
bad joke and finding out it was not. It was just bad.
Let's do that just a second. And what did you, what
followed that, what did you do when you heard that
that was the truth? I went back to my office and got a
radio and started listening to all the news
reports that I could
get. And like I said, I remember most vividly that I
was playing badminton at night. And walked out,
and this was about deer season time, and I thought
this is one of those really sick jokes. And then of
course had the decision to make about bonfire and
some other things. So it was a, as a native
Dallasite, I was very defensive about Dallas
being branded as that radical, and I still remain
somewhat bitter about people branding the whole
city for something that someone who was not even a
resident of the city doing. And you knew all of the
locations. All of the locations. You knew where
those were. With Mr. Rutter, we then had an interim
president. Al Ludeke. Al Ludeke.
And then Williams was selected. How did you hear,
do you remember anything that you heard? Were you
aware of a search process or anything? I was aware
of a search process. And I had heard a little bit
that Jack Williams was a strong candidate. But I
would like to say just a few words. I had a lot of
admiration for Al Lutie. Oh, please, yes, yes. I
thought he came into a very, very awkward
situation. He and Earl Rutter were classmates, as
I understand it, from the same general part of
Texas.
Same type of military record, in that they were
both generals, not the combat record.
There was a lot of suspicion among the faculty
about, you know, here's another class of 32 from
West Texas in general.
And again, Al Ludeke was someone who was not a
dynamic speaker. I think he realized that, and so I
think he viewed his public addresses as a chore to
be endured. And he spoke very succinctly, and had a
lot of thought in what he said. So he was one of those
who would stand up, speak up, and shut up. And I
think a lot of people admired that. And I think that
he gained a lot of respect from a lot of backers
pretty quickly. And then when Jack Williams came
in, Al Ludigant worked with the system planning
and did a very good job with that as well. So for a
transition president, I thought A&M could not
have made a better choice than they did. And then I
think Jack Williams was, by my definition, the
second man for his time at A&M.
He took A&M from the point that Earl Rudder had
brought it to make it really a pretty
comprehensive university. You're back as, at
this point, you're back as the associate? No, I'm
now in the Vice President's office.
One of the recommendations that came out of the
cell study was to have an office of planning. And so
that became a major factor. Charlie Bunnell had
done some work in the general area before I got
there. But worked with planning and then became an
associate vice president.
How did that search process I don't know if there
was a certain process. Who contacted you? John
Calhoun. Describe Calhoun and his style.
It sounds like I'm polishing the apple, but
there's so many that I just have a lot of admiration
for, and John Calhoun is certainly in that
category. I'll tell you one other aside. My first
wife, Joyce, had been part-time secretary in John
Calhoun's office when he was in the system office.
And one of the things, she always liked him a lot,
but one of the stories she told me that just really
amazed her was that someone asked him for a list of
the top five people in the serving field. And the
first one he put on the list was John C. Calhoun Jr.
And Joyce said, you know, it wasn't, he was
bragging. He would just ask to rank them, and he was
in the top five. And most of us are not that
self-assured that we can do that.
But he's very bright, and I think he has a good sense
of humor that is not evident to everyone. For the
people who are around him, he's jovial. He's
outgoing. And one of the things that, again, is of
no consequence, but I enjoyed it at least, was that
there was a very rapid turnover of the secretarial
staff in the Vice President's office. Oftentimes
he'd just refer to someone in the politically, now
politically incorrect way of saying, the new
girl. At one point, someone made up a little desk
sign and said, the new girl. Put that as a name plate
on the girl. Then they wound up with the newest
girl.
But John Calhoun, again, is one of those who can
give you authority and responsibility. And I
think you learn quickly. that you better be very
careful what you suggest, because it may come to
pass. And if you haven't thought it through pretty
carefully, it's not going to go over well with
anybody. And so I think if I'm going to say
something to him, I better be pretty sure of what
I'm going to say.
John Calhoun has a lot of thoughts, and I'll jump
way back. But Frank Hubert has a truly creative
mind. And I'll come back to John Kelly, but one
story that I'd like to get on the record.
On the Harrington Building, in the classroom
portion, Frank Hubert spent a lot of time thinking
about a truly technologically advanced series of
classrooms. And some of the things that he thought
were so good in theory, but didn't work well in
practice.
The Harrington classroom building was designed
that people would enter at the back of the room. And
then the flow would be out the front of the room so
that when fairly large classes changed, there'd
just be some going out, there'd be some coming in,
and there'd be no conflict in the traffic. But the
people didn't go out the front. So there was a lot of
contact between the students going out the way
they were not supposed to. It was sort of like going
up the down staircase. But he had about everything
that was available at that time in the classrooms.
And the console looked like a console on a 747. It
intimidated a lot of the faculty members. But one
of the things that Frank Hubert was set on was there
would not be any overhead projectors in the
Harrington classroom buildings. But we had to go
back later and add those because the faculty
members weren't quite as progressive as Frank
Hubert was. But he had one classroom, classroom
100, where he had a telegraphic set up in there and
it was designed so that the teacher could test as he
was lecturing and the students could plug in the
numbers and then in the back of the room he had a
printout of how many students got the correct
answer and all that. So he was always very much on
the cutting edge, and Frank Hubert was the prime
mover, as far as I know, for the development of KAMU
television, which is still, I think, probably the
smallest
public television station in the country. Now,
and do you happen to know when KAMU came on stream?
Well, it started out over in Bagley Hall. Was it,
was it in the Rudder days or the Williams? Rudders,
Rudder days. Because in that old, you know,
remember back in the old red brick building? That
was pretty bad. But anyway, John Calhoun, you
know, is obviously an engineer and a scientist.
And I think he did a lot and he and, he and Jack
Williams I thought were almost ideal co-leaders
of the university, with Jack William with his
history background and his more liberal arts type
orientation, and John Calvin with his science and
engineering. And it was obvious to me, at least,
that they had a lot of respect for each other.
Can you think of any strong disagreement Not that I
know of. I never did. Were you, did Williams by
chance chat with you or anybody you know before he
selected Calhoun? No, not with me. But you know,
again, if you think about the establishment of the
College of Medicine,
I think the Nautical Archaeology program,
Institute of Nautical Archaeology was a real,
real find for A&M. We've gotten a lot of very
positive public relations after that. The Center
for Tectonal Physics, I think John Calhoun was
probably a major player in that.
So, and those were the things that built for a lot of
our offshore technology. The deep sea drilling
program. When you came over, yeah, everything was
in T. Right. You and Dick Winerdi. Let's talk about
Winerdi and his role. Winerdi had been, I think,
one of John Calhoun's graduate students. Again,
very bright, very creative thought process.
One thing I probably shouldn't say, but I enjoyed
it, was one time Dick had this great revelation
that what we needed was a war room. And that every
bit of information that did exist in the
university should exist and be available in this
war room. And then whatever we needed to do. Hi
there. Would you like a little light? I can give you
light. But anyway, he met with some of us about
doing all this, and Mel LaSalle and some others,
because we had a lot of information, a lot more than
most universities, I think, at that point in time.
One person who I had very little to do with, but I
think was influential, was Andy Suttle. The idea
never had much to do with him. But anyway, I
remember telling Dick that the one thing I did
understand about data is that someone has to input
it, and someone has to be able to access it, and
someone has to order it in a way that's meaningful.
And that what he was proposing to do would be
absolutely wonderful to have, but it would be an
overwhelming task. But Dick,
high energy. like I said, innovative thought
process.
May not be correct, but I didn't have the feeling
that Dick was necessarily the stereotypical
engineering's logical step-by-step process. I
think he could dream the great dream. He and John
Calhoun seemed to be a good pair and work together.
Do you remember Calhoun ever losing his temper?
Mr. No, I really don't. But one of the things that,
again, I think is important from my point of view,
when there would be pretty serious disagreement
between John Calhoun and someone else, most often
an administrator, with the resolution, the thing
that I said is kind of flippantly, but I never
believed there was any hangover heat with John
Calhoun that that when you were through with one
issue, the next issue started to even up. And there
are not many people who are capable of doing that.
There are some people who keep their own private
school book. And I never felt that was true of John
Calvin.
And that if you were reasonably Did
you have any experience with them in the Austin
side of the job? Not a great deal. But again, I think
John Calhoun was viewed as someone who had a lot of
integrity. And I think generally across the
board, A&M has had administrators who have been
viewed to have integrity in dealing with people in
Austin.
And I think that served A&M well. And I think that,
again, maybe because I want to believe it, but I
think that A&M as an institution
was less likely to confront the coordinating
board than maybe some other state-assisted
universities did. And I think A&M has probably
generally been better off for having done that.
When there was a question about whether the
recording board really had the authority to do it
or not, I think A&M was more likely to go ahead and
try to play by the rules as they understood them. I
think A&M was better served by that. Uh, were you
aware during William's last months that he was
becoming physical? Yes. You could see him go down.
I mean, you could just, you could see him in one
time, two weeks later, he was, he was obviously not
as robust as he had been. And one of the things that,
uh, that really caught the attention, I don't know
if you saw it or not, but soon after he died, KMU had a
series of events that Williams had participated
in. And when he came to A&M, he was so robust. And
then at the end, when they were showing clips, it
was just dramatic how physically he was declining
in his fitness.
All right.
So who was the interim
president? Well, Clyde Wells was.
Clyde Wells, yes. Let's back up just a little bit.
Yeah, no. Clyde Wells is the interim, and Williams
goes to the hospital, and McCubbers comes back.
Right. Okay. We hear rumors about the board going
to recreate the system administration. Yes. Can
you throw in any light as to what you heard at that
point about what was supposed to happen, going to
happen, might happen?
Well, I tried to see anything but a little bit, but
there were rumors at least that Clyde Wells would
like to have that as a I don't know. I do
feel certain that from the faculty's point of
view, it was good that it did not become a public
question. But then there were questions about
what would William's role be, who would be. I think
it was pretty well decided they would separate the
office and have a chancellor of the system and a
president of the university. And I think it was
pretty well decided that Williams would be the
chancellor for a while. And then he would be the
president. And then that's when Jarvis became
president, which came as a surprise to Hunter.
Hun? Jeannie? Would you get Hunter back in there
please? So I
think
there were a lot of us who thought, hoped that John
Calhoun would be a serious candidate for
president. and Williams was chancellor and that
would have been in many ways a continuation of what
had been before with less demands on Williams.
And do you remember that first week after the
choice was made by the board that Calhoun not be and
Jarvis be the president? The thing I remember most
was Jarvis coming over and talking to Matt
Prescott about being and the vice president for
active affairs. The question of what my
involvement would be if I would stay or go or
whatever.
So I think that I guess Jarvis and Mac had known each
other better than most of us had Jarvis because of
Mac's involvement with teaching. of
agriculture, even though he was the dean of the
College of Science, so. Were you, did you have much
interaction with Jarvis before that time? No. I
had not. No. And as my memory fuzzy, that Calhoun
moves out of the office over the weekend. Yes. And
Jarvis is there Monday morning. Right, with his
staff. Yeah. And that you and I And Linerdy are
still there, but Linerdy quickly decides that
he's got to- Do something else. He's got to find
another place. Okay, then
any changes in style with Mack and Jarvis, in
administrative style? Very much, they were very
different styles from Calvin. And again, not
being limited by a lot of facts, Jarvis seemed to me
to have very much of the agriculture style of
leadership.
I think
that they were more politically sensitive to a lot
of things. than had been the case with Dr. Kelly.
But there are so many interest groups involved in
agriculture that you have to work with that I'm
sure it's going to influence almost anyone's
style. Because commodity groups and producers
and all kinds of people believe they deserve a lot
of your attention. We'd like to have a lot of
involvement in decisions. All right, we move back
then over to the Koch building. And who are the key
members of Jarvis' office staff? Glenn Dowling
and Steve Pringle were there. And what were their
duties? Glenn worked, I think, primarily with the
budget aspect and some personnel things for
Jarvis. Steve seemed to be more involved with the
political aspects of it. I never really knew
exactly what Steve was directly responsible for.
And I believe George also brought his own
secretary from agriculture. So he in essence
brought his own staff. And they obviously had
already developed their own way of doing
business. And the rest of us had pretty well
developed it, and so it was a transition period to
try to meld the two styles. And Steve did not stay
very long.
Now, let's stop and look back on the Reuben period.
Can you think of any missed opportunities?
A lot of new things were done.
I think he seized most of the opportunities. We had
very rapid growth in graduate programs.
And one of the things that I liked and admired was
that in many ways we didn't try to become the all
comprehensive university. And I think that's a
tough thing for people not to want to do. But
basically we said we're going to continue to build
on our strengths and we're going to try to develop
some new strengths. And graduate education is one
of the real strengths. Williams had a lot of charm.